CSS Tutorial


Examples in Each Chapter


This CSS tutorial contains hundreds of CSS examples.

With our online editor, you can edit the CSS, and click on a button to view the result.


KEP1


CSS Examples


Learn from over 300 examples! With our editor, you can edit the CSS, and click on a button to view the result.


Use the Menu


We recommend reading this tutorial, in the sequence listed in the menu.

If you have a large screen, the menu will always be present on the left.

If you have a small screen, open the menu by clicking the top menu sign ☰.


CSS Templates


We have created some responsive W3.CSS templates for you to use.

You are free to modify, save, share, and use them in all your projects.




CSS Introduction

CSS is the language we use to style a Web page.


What is CSS?


    CSS stands for Cascading Style Sheets
    CSS describes how HTML elements are to be displayed on screen, paper, or in other media
    CSS saves a lot of work. It can control the layout of multiple web pages all at once
    External stylesheets are stored in CSS files

CSS Demo - One HTML Page - Multiple Styles!

Here we will show one HTML page displayed with four different stylesheets. Click on the "Stylesheet 1", "Stylesheet 2", "Stylesheet 3", "Stylesheet 4" links below to see the different styles:


KEP2


Why Use CSS?


CSS is used to define styles for your web pages, including the design, layout and variations in display for different devices and screen sizes.


KEP3


CSS Solved a Big Problem


HTML was NEVER intended to contain tags for formatting a web page!

HTML was created to describe the content of a web page, like:

<h1>This is a heading</h1>

<p>This is a paragraph.</p>

When tags like <font>, and color attributes were added to the HTML 3.2 specification, it started a nightmare for web developers. Development of large websites, where fonts and color information were added to every single page, became a long and expensive process.

To solve this problem, the World Wide Web Consortium (W3C) created CSS.

CSS removed the style formatting from the HTML page!


CSS Saves a Lot of Work!


The style definitions are normally saved in external .css files.

With an external stylesheet file, you can change the look of an entire website by changing just one file!


CSS Syntax


A CSS rule consists of a selector and a declaration block.


KEP4


The selector points to the HTML element you want to style.

The declaration block contains one or more declarations separated by semicolons.

Each declaration includes a CSS property name and a value, separated by a colon.

Multiple CSS declarations are separated with semicolons, and declaration blocks are surrounded by curly braces.


KEP5


Example Explained

    p is a selector in CSS (it points to the HTML element you want to style: <p>).
    color is a property, and red is the property value
    text-align is a property, and center is the property value


CSS Selectors


A CSS selector selects the HTML element(s) you want to style.

CSS selectors are used to "find" (or select) the HTML elements you want to style.

We can divide CSS selectors into five categories:

    Simple selectors (select elements based on name, id, class)
    Combinator selectors (select elements based on a specific relationship between them)
    Pseudo-class selectors (select elements based on a certain state)
    Pseudo-elements selectors (select and style a part of an element)
    Attribute selectors (select elements based on an attribute or attribute value)

This page will explain the most basic CSS selectors.


The CSS element Selector

The element selector selects HTML elements based on the element name.


KEP6


The CSS id Selector


The id selector uses the id attribute of an HTML element to select a specific element.

The id of an element is unique within a page, so the id selector is used to select one unique element!

To select an element with a specific id, write a hash (#) character, followed by the id of the element.


KEP7


The CSS class Selector


The class selector selects HTML elements with a specific class attribute.

To select elements with a specific class, write a period (.) character, followed by the class name.


KEP8


You can also specify that only specific HTML elements should be affected by a class.


KEP9


HTML elements can also refer to more than one class.


KEP10


The CSS Universal Selector


The universal selector (*) selects all HTML elements on the page.


KEP11


The CSS Grouping Selector


The grouping selector selects all the HTML elements with the same style definitions.

Look at the following CSS code (the h1, h2, and p elements have the same style definitions):


KEP12


It will be better to group the selectors, to minimize the code.

To group selectors, separate each selector with a comma.


KEP13


All CSS Simple Selectors


KEP14