How To Add CSS


When a browser reads a style sheet, it will format the HTML document according to the information in the style sheet.


Three Ways to Insert CSS


There are three ways of inserting a style sheet:

    External CSS
    Internal CSS
    Inline CSS


External CSS


With an external style sheet, you can change the look of an entire website by changing just one file!

Each HTML page must include a reference to the external style sheet file inside the <link> element, inside the head section.


KEP15


An external style sheet can be written in any text editor, and must be saved with a .css extension.

The external .css file should not contain any HTML tags.

Here is how the "mystyle.css" file looks:


KEP16


Note: Do not add a space between the property value (20) and the unit (px):
Incorrect (space): margin-left: 20 px;
Correct (no space): margin-left: 20px;


Internal CSS



An internal style sheet may be used if one single HTML page has a unique style.

The internal style is defined inside the <style> element, inside the head section.


KEP17


Inline CSS


An inline style may be used to apply a unique style for a single element.

To use inline styles, add the style attribute to the relevant element. The style attribute can contain any CSS property.


KEP18


Multiple Style Sheets


If some properties have been defined for the same selector (element) in different style sheets, the value from the last read style sheet will be used. 

KEP19


KEP20


Cascading Order


What style will be used when there is more than one style specified for an HTML element?

All the styles in a page will "cascade" into a new "virtual" style sheet by the following rules, where number one has the highest priority:

    Inline style (inside an HTML element)
    External and internal style sheets (in the head section)
    Browser default

So, an inline style has the highest priority, and will override external and internal styles and browser defaults.


CSS Comments

CSS comments are not displayed in the browser, but they can help document your source code.

Comments are used to explain the code, and may help when you edit the source code at a later date.

Comments are ignored by browsers.

A CSS comment is placed inside the <style> element, and starts with /* and ends with */:


KEP21


You can add comments wherever you want in the code:


KEP22


Even in the middle of a code line:


KEP23


Comments can also span multiple lines: 



KEP24


HTML and CSS Comments


From the HTML tutorial, you learned that you can add comments to your HTML source by using the <!--...--> syntax.

In the following example, we use a combination of HTML and CSS comments:


KEP25


CSS Colors


Colors are specified using predefined color names, or RGB, HEX, HSL, RGBA, HSLA values.


CSS Color Names


In CSS, a color can be specified by using a predefined color name:


KEP26


CSS Background Color

You can set the background color for HTML elements:


KEP27


CSS Text Color

You can set the color of text:


KP28


CSS Border Color

You can set the color of borders:


KEP29


CSS Color Values

In CSS, colors can also be specified using RGB values, HEX values, HSL values, RGBA values, and HSLA values:

Same as color name "Tomato":


KEP30


Same as color name "Tomato", but 50% transparent:



KEP31


CSS Backgrounds

The CSS background properties are used to add background effects for elements.


KEP32


CSS background-color

The background-color property specifies the background color of an element.


KEP33


With CSS, a color is most often specified by:

    a valid color name - like "red"
    a HEX value - like "#ff0000"
    an RGB value - like "rgb(255,0,0)"

Look at CSS Color Values for a complete list of possible color values.


Other Elements

You can set the background color for any HTML elements:


KEP34


Opacity / Transparency

The opacity property specifies the opacity/transparency of an element. It can take a value from 0.0 - 1.0. The lower value, the more transparent:


KEP35


Transparency using RGBA

If you do not want to apply opacity to child elements, like in our example above, use RGBA color values. The following example sets the opacity for the background color and not the text:


KEP36


You learned from our CSS Colors Chapter, that you can use RGB as a color value. In addition to RGB, you can use an RGB color value with an alpha channel (RGBA) - which specifies the opacity for a color.

An RGBA color value is specified with: rgba(red, green, blue, alpha). The alpha parameter is a number between 0.0 (fully transparent) and 1.0 (fully opaque).

Tip: You will learn more about RGBA Colors in our CSS Colors Chapter.


KEP37


The CSS Background Color Property


KEP38